# virga-skeleton-tracking

The introduction piece, “Virga,” of my senior work concert, "h e l i o s p h e r e," was a solo acoustic vocal improvisation using the Microsoft Kinect. During the 2018 Fall semester, I took the Middlebury College Computer Science Department's Senior Seminar course and developed a semester long project with a fellow CS major, Emilio Ovalles-Misterman. Emilio and I were interested in using the Microsoft Kinect Sensor to create a body immersive interactive art installation that utilized projection mapping, motion sensing, and machine learning.

After having written code with Emilio in the Fall that connected the Kinect with Processing to track the (X, Y, Z) coordinates of fifteen body joints and map projections in relation to body movement, I wanted to further develop our code so I could use the Kinect with Max MSP and use my movement to control visuals in realtime while I performed. During J- Term, I learned how to send the Kinect’s skeleton tracking data from Processing to Max MSP via OSC so I could receive the skeleton tracking data in realtime in Max MSP. I then researched a number of Max jitter patches I believed could be fascinating if parameters were controlled by movement from realtime Kinect skeleton tracking. After experimenting with iterative function system Max jitter patches and using movement to control the function growth speeds and colors of the iterative function systems I discovered Federico Foderaro’s Amazing Max Stuff tutorials on YouTube and patches on Patreon[1]. I was immediately attracted to the free flowing, waterfall, snow-like, chaotic cluster characteristics of his particle system patches. I expanded Foderaro’s patch for creating a particle system with emitter so that I could map the movement of the particle system to the movement of my left hand.

My plan for “Virga” was to vocally improvise and interact with the particle system’s evolving, pulsing, and shrinking cluster in response to my left hand’s movement. Thus, when I entered the concert hall and assumed my starting position on stage, I started out with a subtle upward melodic phase that slightly moved the particle system but kept it in its orbiting, pulsing
spherical shape. I began to build energy both melodically and visually as I enacted a large sweep of the hand and voice eventually landing on a long held, high note with a suspended hand. I then brought the energy back down with the lowering of my hand and voice until I ended with the suspended pulsing sphere.

[1]. Foderaro, Federico. "How to Create a Particle System with Emitter." YouTube. August 19, 2018.
 Accessed May 20, 2019. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2f_OZviPoww.
 
